---
layout: default
title: Porous Media Theory
---

Porous Media Theory
===================

In this chapter, fundamental concepts and formulations in porous media
theory are presented. The discussion starts with a brief history of
porous media theory. The volume fraction concept and kinematic relations
are then presented. Conservation laws are derived in a general form
which may be applicable to any porous material subjected to different
physical processes. Thermodynamic formulations and phase transitions in
porous media are briefly discussed. Formulations that complete the
mathematical model for a given porous material, such as constitutive
laws, are also discussed. The main porous materials of interest in this
thesis are soils and specific conservation equations are derived for
hydraulic, hydro-mechanical and thermo-hydro-mechanical processes by
making the necessary assumptions for particular application needs.

Background
----------

The study of porous materials is essential in various disciplines of
science and engineering such as soil mechanics, oil and reservoir
engineering, biomechanics, material sciences and chemical engineering.
The porous materials studied under porous media theory can either occur
naturally, such as soils and rocks, or may be artificial, such as
sponges and synthetic polymers. The physical and mechanical properties
of such materials have been studied experimentally and mathematically
over several decades by a number of researchers. Modern porous media
theory, which will be discussed in detail in later sections, developed
over a long period of time to reach to what is known today. The
historical development of the theory is documented in some publications
such as [@de1988historical] and [@de2003reflections].

There are some important milestones in the development of porous media
theory, as presented in [@de1998theory]. In the earliest stages of the
theory, Leonhard Euler presented the first discussion on the geometry of
a porous medium and indirectly contributed to the formulation of the
axioms of continuum mechanics. The introduction of the volume fraction
concept by Reinhard Woltman in the 19th century proved to be a
fundamental contribution. This concept was further discussed by Achille
Delesse. The development of mixture theory, a branch of porous media
theory, was initiated by Adolph Fick. An important mathematical relation
describing the motion of a fluid in a porous medium was derived by Henry
Darcy, which we refer to today as Darcy’s law. In early 20th century,
Paul Fillunger and Karl von Terzaghi made seminal contributions to the
theory of liquid-saturated porous solids. Fillunger developed equations
for uplift forces while studying the stresses acting on concrete and
masonry gravity dams. Terzaghi also studied uplift forces independently
of Fillunger and further made contributions to the understanding of
capillary pressure, the concept of effective stresses and soil
consolidation theory. The effective stress concept was discussed earlier
by Fillunger. After mid 20th century, the theory of porous media started
taking shape to become what we know today. Some of the contributions in
this period include work on the theory of mixtures by
[@green1967theory], without using the volume fraction concept, the study
of fluid motion in porous media by [@whitaker1969advances], modeling of
simultaneous heat, mass and momentum transfer by
[@whitaker1977simultaneous], the treatment of the mechanics of
continuous porous media by [@prevost1980mechanics], a theory of
immiscible and structured mixtures by [@bedford1983theories] and a
generalized approach to the derivation of balance laws by
[@hassanizadeh1986derivation]. Application of the theory of mixtures to
the modeling of incompressible and compressible porous media was
presented by [@bowen1980incompressible] and [@bowen1982compressible],
respectively. A discussion relating mixture theory and Biot’s approach
to porous media theory can be found in [@coussy1998mixture].

In the following sections, the basic components of porous media theory
are presented. The volume faction concept, a fundamental concept in
porous media theory, is first discussed. The conservation laws of mass,
momentum and energy are then presented in a general form for a porous
medium with any number of constituents. The mechanics of phase change in
a porous medium and how it affects the conservation laws is then
treated. Constitutive equations that govern the constituents of the
porous medium are required to complete the theory and these are
discussed afterwards. These sections are presented in a brief way here
and a detailed presentation of the topics may be referred from modern
treatments of porous media theory such as in [@coussy2004poromechanics],
[@vadasz2008emerging] and [@ehlers2013porous].